---
title: "Havard Art Museum Assignment"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"

tags:
  - Assignment
  
---

## **Objects of Interest**
The Harvard Art Museum [website](https://harvardartmuseums.org/) features a diverse range of artworks from various historical periods and cultures. Each piece tells a unique story, enriching our understanding of art's evolution and its global impact. With detailed descriptions, it's a rich resource for art enthusiasts and scholars alike to explore and appreciate visual culture. While browsing through various websites using specific keywords related to artworks of interest, I stumbled upon a few intriguing pieces. 

One captivating piece I found was [*The Virgin with the Sleeping Christ Child*](https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/object/299919) by Orazio Gentileschi, circa 1610. Gentileschi skillfully conveys the sacramental meaning of Christ’s birth while foreshadowing his eventual sacrifice. The painting portrays the Child sleeping in the Virgin’s lap, symbolizing the solemnity of his future death. Notably, the Child holds an apricot, representing the forbidden fruit and alluding to the original sin that Christ's eventual sacrifice will redeem. Against a dark void, the figures are dramatically illuminated, inviting reflection on the intertwined themes of birth, mortality, and redemption.

Naturally, I was drawn to search for representations of my nationality, and thus, I found [*Kaaba Style Shama*](https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/object/58463?position=1&context=person&id=24287) among the results when I searched for Ghanaian artworks on the Harvard Art Museum website. Captured by Philip Kwame Apagya, a Ghanaian photographer born in Sekondi, Ghana, in 1958, this photograph from 1996 offers a captivating glimpse into Ghanaian culture and aesthetics. The title "Kaaba Style Shama" hints at a connection to Islamic traditions, particularly the Kaaba in Mecca, which holds significant religious importance in Islam. Apagya's portrayal of this cultural fusion reflects the diverse influences and intersections found within Ghanaian society, offering not only a visual representation but also an introspective journey into my own heritage and identity.

Another fascinating find in the Harvard Art Museum's collection is [*Unc.lue & Nana*](https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/object/376537?position=1&context=person&id=69294), a photograph by Claudio Eshun, a Ghanaian artist born in Accra in 1996. It's particularly intriguing that this piece, part of the [*Elegant Alien*](https://www.claudioeshun.com/personalwork) series from 2019, is present among the museum's offerings despite its classification under American culture. Eshun's Ghanaian heritage is evident in the composition of “Elegant Alien”, providing a unique perspective that transcends boundaries.

Navigating the website was made easier by the inclusion of both the piece's name and picture, facilitating my search. The search feature also made it effortless to find artworks related to specific cultures. However, the organization of objects felt somewhat randomized, lacking clear connections between them. Using the CSV files provided a more structured list categorizing subjects based on culture and period, giving insight into the museum's curation preferences and cultural representation goals.



## **The Most and Least Viewed Objects from the British Culture in the Harvard Art Museum**

>  Using the All_culture_information.csv, it became evident that certain cultures stood out at the forefront. American artifacts claimed the highest position on the chart, boasting over 90,000 items. Following closely behind were German, French, Italian, and British artifacts, making up the top five alongside their American counterparts. This prevalence of Western cultures within the collection may stem from a historical pattern wherein Europeans generously bequeathed artifacts upon esteemed institutions like The Harvard Art Museum.
Most of the cultures with the least number of objects were found in either Asia or Africa. This discrepancy in representation highlights a broader issue of underrepresentation of non-Western cultures in Western institutions.


One of the most viewed artifacts from the British culture, [*The Blessed Damozel*](https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/object/299805) is a profound painting by Dante Gabriel Rossetti, inspired by his own poem of the same name composed in 1847. Rossetti's painting, resembling a Renaissance altarpiece, portrays the damozel as a surrogate for the Virgin Mary. The two-part frame, designed by Rossetti, symbolizes the separation between heaven and earth, echoing the poem's themes. This deliberate design choice underscores the spiritual and emotional tension between the heavenly and earthly realms, as described in Rossetti's evocative poem. Housed in the Harvard Art Museum's European and American Art section, this masterpiece invites contemplation of love, longing, and the transcendent power of art, showcasing Rossetti's remarkable talent as both a poet and an artist. 
[*The Blessed Damozel*](https://harvardartmuseums.org/collections/object/299805) continues to captivate audiences today with its exploration of love and longing. Rossetti's portrayal of the damozel, leaning from heaven to gaze at her earthly lover, resonates across cultures and generations, evoking a universal sense of yearning. In a world where relationships often transcend physical boundaries, the painting's emotive power lies in its ability to capture the timeless themes of love and separation. Viewers empathize with the damozel's longing for reunion. Rossetti's masterful depiction invites contemplation and introspection, while the painting's timeless beauty and romantic allure offer solace and inspiration to contemporary audiences. This emotional resonance is likely why the artifact has garnered a significant number of views.

Some items of British culture in the Harvard Art Museum had very low views, with some having none at all and this may be due to several reasons. One possibility is that they are lesser-known or less-promoted pieces within the collection, resulting in fewer visitors seeking them out specifically. Additionally, factors such as their placement within the museum, lack of visibility in exhibitions or online platforms, or limited marketing efforts may contribute to their lower visibility. Furthermore, from the data obtained from the Harvard Art Museum, most of the artists of these works are unknown, which could further diminish their visibility as they lack the recognition or notoriety associated with more well-known artists. Moreover, these artifacts probably have no cultural significance attached to them, which might also contribute to their lower viewership.


## **Comparing Cultures - British, Indian & Chinese**


> In my analysis of the Harvard Art Museum, I will be comparing the **British**, **Indian**, and **Chinese** cultures. Analyzing the data on the accession years of artworks from various cultures at the Harvard Art Museum allows for an exploration into what influenced their acquisition and how this relates to the historical context of each culture. This analysis will also aid in understanding how the intertwined history of these cultures has been translated into artworks.


**The Number Of Objects of Each Culture Present**

The histogram below illustrates the distribution of items from three distinct cultures within the HAM. It is evident that the British culture boasts the highest number of artworks in the museum, surpassing both Indian and Chinese cultures. An intriguing observation is the greater representation of artworks from the Chinese culture compared to the Indian culture. While India has a rich and diverse artistic heritage, including its renowned contributions to sculpture, painting, and architecture, the prominence of Chinese artworks reflects the significant influence of Chinese art and culture across history. I'm particularly interested in exploring how the industrial evolution might have caused more Asian artworks to end up in the Western world, specifically in institutions like the Harvard Art Museum. The enduring legacy of Chinese artistic traditions, spanning millennia, underscores their enduring relevance and impact on the global art scene, as evidenced by their notable presence in the Harvard Art Museum's collection.